It’s not okay to make a cheap-looking phone anymore.

Now that Apple is finally making big phones, and even the cheapest Android phones feel nice, we all expect more from Samsung — and rightly so. A flagship phone has to be great or it’s going to get laughed out of the room. If the Galaxy S6 was another plasticky, boring phone like last year’s Galaxy S5 or if it merely introduced a few hardware tricks, it would have gotten laughed out of the entire neighborhood.

There is a version of the phone with a hardware trick, the Galaxy S6 Edge with a curved display. But that’s a distraction; the real story is that Samsung needed to learn that hardware prowess and software features are tools you use to build something great, not ends in themselves. Most Galaxy phones are uninspired compilations of spec lists. For the S6, Samsung to needed to find inspiration, and it did: in Apple.

The Galaxy S6 is what happens when Samsung doesn’t try to copy Apple’s phones, but instead finally tries to copy Apple’s product philosophy.

 Galaxy S6 review images
The first thing to know about the S6 is that it doesn’t feel much like other Samsung phones. Instead of a plastic or faux-leather back, it’s glass on the front and the back with metal around the rim. We’ve seen other phones do this, but none have done it so well. The Galaxy S6 looks great and feels even better.

The edges are subtly textured from flat to curved in all the right spots. The seams between the glass and the metal are nigh-microscopic, and the whole thing just feels fantastic. It weighs just a hair more than an iPhone 6, and it’s slightly bigger as well. But I actually find it easier to hold and to reach the far corners because the glass is less likely to slip than the iPhone’s metal finish. It glides into a pocket and stays in my hand.

If you wanted to go hunting for problems, you could find them. Maybe the Gorilla Glass 4 won’t hold up to drops or could be prone to scratching (neither has been the case for me so far). The camera bump on the back is an overly large wart. That’s about it, from a straight physical design perspective. And in both cases, I’m simply not worried about it.

Then there’s the elephant in the room: it really does remind you of the iPhone. This isn’t a straight rip, of course. From the front, it’s the spitting image of the Galaxy S5. The back is glass, and the curves fit Samsung’s traditional Galaxy shape instead of iPhone’s rounded rectangle. But take a look at the bottom of each phone: You’ll find the same perfectly machined holes and ports in basically identical spots. Samsung also dropped the removable battery, the microSD storage expansion, and even the waterproofing, all in the name of design.

THE GALAXY S6 LOOKS GREAT AND FEELS EVEN BETTER

This comparison is the makings of an epic argument between partisans of both companies (and I’m sure you will get a taste of that if you read the comments below). But I really don’t care if Samsung copied any particular iPhone design element or not. What I care about is that it really does seem like Samsung finally got around to copying the most important thing: a fully conceived, well-executed design.

It’s actually remarkable to see a Samsung device where design feels like it was a consideration from the start, not something applied only after the component list was compiled. Go ahead and have your battles about which is better, who copied who, and even whether it’s worth losing that traditional Samsung removable battery. While you’re doing that, I’ll be over here enjoying this elegant and refined device.

If there’s any single feature of the iPhone you could say Samsung copied, it’s the fingerprint sensor. And thank god it did, because it’s actually useful as an unlocking mechanism now. The interface for setting it up looks exactly like Apple’s, with a fingerprint that slowly gets colored in as it learns. But you can use it from any angle simply by resting your finger on the home button, and though it’s not quite as fast or as accurate as the iPhone, it’s very close.

But that’s where the comparisons stop, because the rest is all pure, unapologetically Samsung. The Galaxy S6 features a parade of specs, each one more audacious than the last. There’s the IR blaster, the heart rate monitor that doubles as a shutter button for selfies, the support for not one but two wireless charging standards, the insanely fast new processor, the 16-megapixel optically stabilized camera, and even a super loud speaker. But it all culminates in the display — and what a culmination it is.

The Galaxy S6 has one of the finest screens I have ever seen on a phone. It’s a 5.1-inch Super AMOLED display with a completely unnecessary number of pixels, 2560 x 1440. Forget any gripes you may have heard about AMOLED screens in the past; they don’t apply here. By simply throwing a pixel density of 577 PPI and the processing power necessary to move light through them, Samsung has overcome any complaints with brute force. And also with better color awareness: whites are whiter, blacks are blacker, colors are vibrant without being oversaturated.

At oblique angles, it’s not as accurate as the traditional LCD you’ll find on an iPhone, and it doesn’t sit quite as close to the surface of the glass. But when you’re looking straight on, everything is ridiculously sharp. There’s also a huge gamut of brightness, from eye-searing to safe to read in bed, and the auto-brightness is actually useful.

 Galaxy S6 review images
As long as I’m talking about the screen, let’s talk about the Galaxy S6 Edge, whose distinguishing feature is a screen that curves around two sides. We’re not reviewing it separately because it is, for nearly all intents and purposes, the exact same phone as the regular S6. In fact, the only intent and purpose that really matters for the Edge is marketing: it’s just an incredibly cool-looking phone that’s sure to draw people into the store. It’s an example of Samsung’s engineering abilities and the kind of thing that will wow your friends at the bar for a minute or two.

Unfortunately, it’s not much more than that.

The S6 Edge has the same size screen as the regular S6, just with that slight curve. The effect is trippy when you slide an icon across it, and in some cases it’s just really nice to glide your thumb over it. But the tradeoff is that the sides of the phone are thinner and feel sharper.

Samsung has added a few software tricks to go along with the curved screen. You can set a row of colored, favorite contacts that you can swipe to see. When one of those contacts calls you and your phone is face-down, the table lights up with the appropriate color. There’s a night clock that’s inexplicably limited to working for 12 hours a day. Lastly, there’s the "Information stream," which will give you the time, notifications, weather, and a random Yahoo News headline. That last feature is super slow and buggy, and the gesture to bring it up is really hard to get right.

THE S6 EDGE IS PRETTY, BUT NOT WORTH THE EXTRA $100

Basically, the extra $100 you have to spend to get the Edge buys you a cool-looking phone with some very forgettable software features. I think the regular S6 is handsome enough on its own and feels better in the hand to boot. Between the two, it’s the one to get.