“America got into ‘sports specific’ training 15-20 years ago and forgot the fundamentals,” laments Gray Cook. “This created throwing athletes without legs and running athletes who could not do a single push-up correctly. It created swimmers who could not control their body on dry land and cyclists who could not stand up straight.”

A solid foundation of general strength is a must before one takes on specialized training. Punching with rubber bands might be useful to an experienced boxer. A beginner who is lacking the skill and the strength has nothing to gain and a future title to lose by emulating a pro. Russian experience shows that practicing the special without the general leads to short term gains followed by a long-term plateau and likely injuries. Skipping the hard and boring general training and going straight to the fun sport-specific stuff is akin to going to college from grade school. It doesn’t work.

Professor Nikolay Ozolin stresses: “Pay special attention to the development of general strength as it concentrates many components of physical preparedness.” He clarifies that the term “general” refers to “the ability to perform any physical work more or less successfully.”

General strength built with exercises not intended to duplicate any athletic movement becomes a foundation of the pyramid on which special or sport-specific strength is built. The tip will never reach high if the base is thin and narrow or not there at all.

Before getting specifically strong you must get generally strong.

Here is the StrongFirst prescription for athletes. Forget sport-specific training until you are almost a contender. Until then practice only basic strength exercises (kettlebell, barbell, bodyweight) plus the skills of your sport.

Kettlebell training is famous for making you better at a whole lot of things you have not practiced, from powerlifting to distance running. Kettlebell lifters or gireviks call this effect the “what the hell effect.” This is general strength training at its best. Powerlifter Donnie Thompson stopped deadlifting altogether, started kettlebelling and took his deadlift from 766 to 832 in less than a year. Brazilian BJJ black belt kettlebell students of Senior SFG instructor Doug Nepodal have seen superior results on the mat once they have switched from a fancy periodized “sport-specific” conditioning regimen to kettlebell swings and get-ups.