NSR 1: Day one
Meant to post something before racing got started but just didn't get around to it. Before getting into today, some thoughts on my injury and the last week in Clemson:

After about 10 days on the bike in Clemson, I was fortunate enough to get back into rowing without much trouble. Ben and I got back in the boat together and things have been moving pretty well. I think we are both excited to see what we can do, given what feels like some marked improvements in our technique and base speed. I still have some tightness in my chest and its far from perfect, but as long as I stay on top of it with stretching, I should be OK. Before we left Clemson, splits in the 2x were looking like splits on the erg.  We have always been able to get off the line well and finish well, but we haven't always had the wherewithal to run at world class base speed in the middle 1k, so that has been our main focus. We have been talking a lot about light suspension, releasing horiztonally, keeping our posture, and staying with the puddle at base pace. Unfortunately, the wind has been nasty and practice was cancelled yesterday so we weren't able to get on the course before the time trial to get back in touch with some of those technical points.

This morning, when we got down to the course, the first thing I saw was that Derek and Ian scratched. Bummer. I think it is Derek's ribs that are sore. Whatever it is, it's too bad. I know those guys are talented and was looking forward to racing it up with them and seeing how we all stacked up. I know that they were itching to race and I feel bad when an opportunity to race is lost. I hope Derek heals up quickly and can be at full strength later in the season. As for us, sucks to lose a boat that would have heightened everyone's performance, but we need to stay on task and get better every time we get on the water.

It's forecasted to be super windy all week. 15-20 mph most of the time. This morning it was very calm, maybe a breath of cross for the pairs, but then gradually picked up into a cross head around 5 mph, I think it continued as the Speed Order events went down in the second TT. This was a good chance for us to open up our lungs a bit and get the travel out of our systems since we didn't get to do much yesterday. I'd say technically we were a little rusty and not nearly as a aggressive as we will need to be, but I think it primed us well for tomorrow's race. Not to mention, it was just sweet to be back on a  race course again. I really enjoyed being out there. Looking forward to blasting off the start tomorrow. We will race at 7.48 am tomorrow morning in the semifinal, 3 advance to the final on Saturday.